yep galaxies can die because they're
made stars hundreds of billions of stars
and there's also lots of hydrogen gas
permeating the space between them as
well that you can make more stars out of
but the thing is stars are made out of
hydrogen gas they use that as fuel to
burn but when that runs out a star can
die and so what happens when all your
stars die off and also you get rid of
the gas between the stars that you could
make more new stars out of well then
your galaxies would in effect die as
well
now how long stars live depends on how
massive they are the more massive the
star the shorter its lifetime because
the more stuff you have there then the
more gravity pulls inwards and so to
counteract that stronger pull inwards
the star has to burn its fuel a higher
rate so even though it's so much more
massive than the other ones the rate at
which it burns through its fuel is so
quick that it ends its life in about a
hundred thousand years or so these stars
are the hottest as well because they're
burning so much fuel at once and so they
burn blue which might sound strange to a
lot of people that hot things are blue
because that's not what taps in
bathrooms have been telling us for our
entire lives right but think of like a
Bunsen burner flame or a flame on a
cooker on a hob right it's bright blue
it's much hotter than say a candle flame
which is more of a yellowish color just
like cooler stars that live a lot longer
so cooler stars much smaller things like
our Sun which you know about 200 times
lighter than the big blue stars and they
can burn their fuel that hydrogen gas at
a much lazier rate so they even though
they start with a lot less hydrogen gas
like 200 times less they can actually
live for tens of billions of years now
the universe is only like 14 billion
years or so ish old and so some of the
smallest stars that formed at the very
start of the universe are actually still
kicking around today so technically the
universe hasn't been around for long
enough for a galaxy to completely die
and all of its stars die off but we do
see galaxies that are only made of these
smaller cooler stars because all of
their bigger hotter stars that burn very
blue have all died off they look a lot
yellow a reddish in color red being the
opposite end of the spectrum to blue but
I mean it's yellowish in color right and
these tend to be the biggest galaxies as
well like they've formed a load of stars
over their life
but now they've just been left over with
all of the small stars of all those
episodes of star formation the question
is though why hasn't it made more stars
because when a star dies that gas gets
recycled back into the galaxy again so
what's now stopping that galaxy from
using that gas and making more stars out
of it if you think it through somehow to
take a galaxy from happy and lots of
lots of stars forming - nothing forming
at all you somehow have to make it an
unsuitable environment for stars to form
you either have to remove the gas that
you need to make more stars from that
galaxy all you need to make it so that
it's not able to be used for star
formation and the way that you would do
that is to actually heat that gas now
that might sound really strange because
you know to form a star it needs to be
really hot and it means to ignite
nuclear fusion overcome the forces
repelling pushing two hydrogen atoms
together so that you confuse them to
become helium the thing is for it to get
that hot in the first place it has to
become very dense it has to collect
under gravity to be able to do that and
the thing is the hotter those gas
molecules are the less likely they are
to collect under gravity because the
hotter they are the faster they're
moving so they're all zipping around
this galaxy at too high of a speed to be
collected together kind of like trying
to collect like over excitable puppies
together right if they're super tired
it's too easy to collect them in one
space but if they've got two ton of
energy and you try to like collect them
all together into one place you're gonna
struggle I don't know the analogy worked
in my head a minute ago I'm sticking
with it so we call any process that can
cause this shutdown of star formation
either through removing the gas or
heating the gas a quenching process the
star formation has literally been
quenched I'm figuring out the processes
that can cause quenching was basically
what my entire PhD thesis was on which
one day I will make a video on what I
found but I think today I just want to
talk through
of those processes kind of like a
quenching 101 so first up we can split
quenching processes into two categories
right the things that happen internal to
a galaxy and things that happen
externally to a galaxy you can think of
it as like nature versus nurture you
know that they talk about in biology all
the time like how someone is raised is
it their nature that makes them that way
or is it the way that they have been
nurtured by family and friends around
them so for a galaxy external things
things that happen from the outside so
something to do with its environment and
internally something about the galaxy
itself that can prevent it from making
more stars of course just like politics
is never a 1 D spectrum is it it's
always 2 D and so for a quenching 101 in
two dimensions actually we also can
split things in terms of how fast they
act as well so are they very rapid
processes that cause like an immediate
shutdown of star formation or they much
slower process they're sort of slowly
lowers the rate at which a galaxy forms
new stars over time until after say
billions of years it's managed to stop
it forming them fully and so us
astrophysicists like to classify
quenching processes on this diagram in
terms of whether they're fast slow
external or internal they lie scattered
across this entire diagram so I figured
let's go through them one by one of what
processes can cause this so let's start
in the rapid external part of the
diagram with the process that I think a
lot of people generally have heard of
and that is the idea of a galaxy mergers
so a collision of two galaxies so that
they become one galaxy
[Music]
and that's to to happen to our own Milky
Way galaxy it's going to merge with the
Andromeda galaxy in a couple of billion
years time it's ages away you don't need
galactic collision insurance I promise
you and this is all because the two
galaxies are coming together under the
force of gravity between them which is
strong enough to overcome dark energy
which is causing the expansion of the
universe on those small scales if
they're close together and no two stars
will collide in that merger of two
galaxies either because the space
between stars is just so big what does
happen though is that the hydrogen gas
that fills the space between all of the
stars in a galaxy does collide and where
that collides you get shock fronts it's
incredibly dense and it triggers a lot
of star formation so much so that when
you get these huge star bursts in
galaxies that are merging like way in
excess of any normal star formation rate
that we see in other galaxies
you know usually we see like 1 to 2
solar masses so the mass of the Sun per
year forming in galaxies but in star
bursts you can be forming like a hundred
to two hundred times the mass of the Sun
per year in stars in a star burst which
you might be thinking well that's the
opposite of quenching Becky but if you
think about it if you use all your gas
up very quickly in this one go big or go
home
vendor event that the galaxy has then
you're not gonna have much gas left over
for your next generation of stars and so
you very effectively cut off the star
formation rate very quickly by using it
up too quickly
the thing is obviously when those stars
die they're going to recycle that gas
back into the galaxy and you think well
then it will be back again after another
hundred thousand years or so for it to
use it to make more stars again the
problem is in a galaxy merger the
gravitational forces between these two
galaxies means that everything sloshes
around for a good billion years before
the galaxy settles back down but when
that happens you inject so much more
energy into that gas and you slosh it
around so much that you give those gas
particles more energy again and so they
heat up and essentially you heat all the
gas in the entire
Galaxy so much so that none of it is
then useful for star formation
so yes you caused these big starbursts
locking away a load of the gas that you
would use at later times and then you
heat sort of stirring the pot all the
rest of the gas that you could have used
that was left over so that it can never
be used again and you end up with the
remnant of the galaxy merger just being
this big blob of a red and dead galaxy
that has no stars forming in it anymore
and this explains why the majority of
the dead galaxies we see are the most
massive because they've got that way by
merging together now you're gonna get a
lot of galaxy mergers when you have
galaxies really close together in a very
dense environment and that all depends
like sort of where in the universe this
galaxies actually is because if we could
sort of zoom out on the entire sort of
structure of the universe when we
simulate what happens if you start off
with just a big soup of hydrogen in the
early universe and sort of run the
simulation through of how gravity
affects that you end up forming this
really cool web of like filaments that
intersect and along that web is where
you get all the galaxies forming because
that's where the most stuff is for them
to form from and when the filaments
intersect is where you have a node and
you get a big group or cluster of
galaxies grouped together you then have
voids all between as well we think the
Milky Way and Andromeda are actually in
quite a big void in our universe but
actually by having galaxies close
together even if they don't merge you
can quench the galaxies star formation
rate I'll be at much slower rate than
the sort of instantaneous way that
mergers do it so we've hopped over to a
sort of external slow side of our
diagram now with things that we call
environmental quenching basically
whether the galaxy is alone or not we
call a galaxy's environment because the
thing is when you get galaxies in these
big groups you have a lot of gas in that
node where all those filaments intersect
as well and because all of these
galaxies are very energetic and sort of
moving
around this big group and clump of
galaxies you heat that gas again so much
so that it actually glows in x-rays and
we can actually detect that and see that
it is incredibly incredibly hot now you
can imagine a galaxy that's been
relatively left alone all its life gets
captured by the gravity of one of these
big groups or clusters of galaxies and
it starts to in fall onto this group and
this very hot gas that's glowing in
x-rays and you can imagine the effect
that that has on the nice pristine cold
hydrogen gas that this galaxy has to
form new stars waves so there's a couple
of different processes we think happen
first ones called Ram pressure stripping
literally means that like the galaxy
feels a wind as a in falls on that group
because of this hot gas I had this
explained to me when I was a grad
student as like riding a bike so fast
that all of your hair falls out and it's
safe to say that I have been terrified
of riding bikes ever since cuz not
another process you could have is
thermal evaporation which essentially
means as the cold gas hits the hot gas
the cold gas heats up and then you can
no longer use it for star formation my
favorite is viscous stripping which is
such a fun phrase to say but it's all to
do with the fact that the cold gas is
actually really slow-moving whereas the
hot gas if the group and cluster is
moving very very fast and so you set up
these outflows out of the galaxy because
of the interaction of the two then
you've got something called harassment
which can happen to any galaxy in the
group whether it's improving or not you
can imagine them sort of like whizzing
around on orbits and having very fast
flybys with other galaxies in the group
not merging because they're moving so
fast but lots and lots of repeat
interactions where the gravity just sort
of pulls on it a little bit as it goes
and again heats up all that gas inside
the galaxy that it could use to make
more stars I clearly like to represent
all of those processes with emojis
because if you look at them they read
like a Quentin Tarantino movie script
and sometimes you just you just need a
little bit of joy injecting back in
these horrific sounding processes on the
opposite side of the spectrum
now galaxies left alone in voids all
their lives you know just to their own
devices you would think would be
completely fine they'd be safe from all
this viscous stripping and collisions
and mergers and everything but actually
that's not the case the galaxy's nature
can actually cause it to stop forming
stars so first of all something we call
morphological crunching so morphology
essentially is the shape of a galaxy
what shape is it and this is essentially
saying the shape of the galaxy can
affect how many stars it could be
forming so people think about what
galaxies look like you always picture
the big grand beautiful spiral arms like
we think our Milky Way has but the thing
is those beautiful spiral arms can
actually funnel gas from the outskirts
of the galaxy and dump it into the very
center of the galaxy where it's
incredibly dense you've got a lot going
on it's very energetic stars instead of
being on nice ordered sort of flat nice
disk rotation can be on orbits a little
bit more like a beehive like they're all
still orbiting but it's very chaotic so
it's very energetic there so by taking
that gas from the outskirts and
funneling it into the middle you're
gonna heat that gas a lot and again hot
gas is useless to a galaxy it can't use
it for star formation so the majority of
sparrows we see are very blue beautiful
picturesque galaxies but then actually
about 30 percent of them are these red
and dead galaxies and they've gotten
that way because they've essentially
funneled their gas away from where it's
needed and dumped it in the middle or it
can't be used
it's especially apparent when you have a
spiral galaxy with this bar structure in
the middle as well it's like long thin
structure where the spiral arms come out
the outside we think it's not confirmed
yet people are really trying to prove
that this is happening but we think that
that process is much stronger when you
have a bar there's also something called
mass quenching as well which is where
the most massive galaxies are more
likely to be quenched as well and people
think that's all to do with the
supernova essentially yes okay
supernovae do recycle the gas back into
the
see but if you form lots and lots of
stars to get that massive then you're
gonna have a lot of supernovae a lot of
supernovae injects energy back into the
galaxy and could also even expel the gas
if they're particularly energetic so a
lot of supernovae means you heat your
gas and again you can't use it for star
formation
so galaxy gets a bit greedy and it can
end up shooting itself in the foot so
these processes which can funnel gas to
the center not just the morphological
quenching but you know mergers do that
to uh sort of sloshes to the middle can
actually trigger another process that
acts internally to the galaxy but very
rapidly hopping over now to our last
quadrant in our diagram something that
can act from the inside and cut
something off that rapidly needs to be
very energetic so what's at the center
of every galaxy a supermassive black
hole and if you feed gas to that
supermassive black hole it is going to
start eating it a process that we really
call accretion accretion just means
collecting stuff under gravity and the
way black holes do that is is that
material comes in it starts to spin
around the black hole and you'll know if
you take a ball of pizza dough and you
set it spinning it ends up coming out
into a flat disc so you get these really
cool discs a very very hot very
fast-moving spiraling material around
these supermassive black holes if you
feed them with lots of material in the
first place but the thing is the black
hole isn't just this endless Hoover it
can't just eat as much material as it
wants to it is limited by the fact that
there is a pressure with how much stuff
you can get into that disk at once and
sometimes if you overload it then what
happens is you get an outflow from that
disk not from the black hole because you
know when stuff just cross the event
horizon nothing can escape because it
can't travel faster than the speed of
light but you can get an outflow of
material from the accretion disk and
sometimes if there's big magnetic fields
as well that can all get funneled into
these huge jets that are light-years
long bigger than the galaxies themselves
and you can imagine that
much energy being pushed out back into
the galaxy from these outflows so again
closer than the speed of light they're
so energetic and so so hot of course
that's gonna either heat the gas or it's
gonna expel the gas that you're gonna
need for more star formation now this is
a process we call a GN feedback a GN
active galactic nuclei so the black hole
in the center is active and feedback
because well by feeding the black hole
you've ended up with this feedback loop
of stopping the galaxies from forming
more stars now some of you will have
noticed that on that part a GN feedback
has a big question mark after it and
essentially that's my job in a minute is
to try and get rid of that question mark
it's what I spend my research time doing
because the thing is theorists are
convinced we need AG and feedback in
simulations to make them match
observations that we make of the
universe for telescopes the thing is we
haven't really found any direct evidence
for it happening in observations we have
indirect evidence so we find the most
AGN between the very blue galaxies and
the very red galaxies sort of in the
green colors we call it green it's not
obviously not actually green we find
them there which suggests that they
could be causing this process but we've
never found any statistically
significant full across the entire
population of say a million galaxies if
this actually happening you know we
haven't found the smoking gun and it's
that smoking gun that I'll be looking
for when I get back to looking at my
data at my desk tomorrow I'm just
thinking the last time I wore this
outfit to film everyone in the comments
dubbed it my Harrison Ford outfit
because this little waistcoat thing
which you know what I'm just gonna own
it I love this Harrison Ford outfit and
they can burn their fuel at a lot and
they can burn and they can burn the
hydrogen gas their fuel and a lot of the
leis
raids and they can burn the hydrogen gas
their fuel at a lot a much lazier rate
and they can burn their fuel their
hydrogen gas at a lot of a lazier rate
and a lot of lazier and much lazier he's
still kicking around today Bellino's
dribble he knows that's not cool I gotta
trade a Bellino's baby so by the time
this video comes out I'm not gonna be at
home I'm gonna be visiting somewhere
filming some videos I am so excited it's
a place I've never been before they've
invited me to come and film and I am
like who kid on Christmas so I mean I'm
probably gonna blobbed on Instagram or
something about where I'm going before
now but you know leave your guesses in
the comments look see if you're right in
a couple of weeks
you